We're talking with Dr. Klass, and she just asked me a wonderful question.
Why don't you just repeat it?
Oh, I was asking whether, we were talking about books that changed the world, and I was asking how many of them were fiction, and I was wondering whether there are any of the sort of industrial revolution novels of England, many of which were written in a spirit of protest, which actually changed the world, turned up in legislative debates, anything?
Well, what do you think?
I mean, Rachel Carson I would certainly put in there.
I would even put To Kill a Mockingbird in there, and if not changing the world, it's certainly changing the way people think about civil rights, and even its life as a movie, which transcends its impact as a literary work.
Industrial Revolution is a great question.
Well, I actually cite To Kill a Mockingbird every time I talk about Reach Out and Read, because I talk about how our ideas of how children learn to read have changed.
And one of the things which I read in a history of ideas about how children learn to read was that in the 1920s, there was an idea that the developing brain wasn't ready for the work of reading until children were six years and six months old.
And that seems very far away, but if you read To Kill a Mockingbird, she goes to the first day of school in first grade, and the teacher discovers that she can read and is very upset by it and tells her to go home and tell her father not to read with her anymore.
Boy, that's amazing, isn't it?
Yeah.
That's almost a negative approach to the situation.
Yeah, yeah.
The teacher says something like, you know, your daddy does not know how to teach reading.
I'm going to...
try to undo all the damage that he's done.
And was this a prevailing thought?
That's what the articles that I had read about the history of attitudes about how to teach reading had said.
But you never know whether that's real or whether it's kind of a straw man.
You know, we're sort of laughing at the funny ideas they had in the 1920s.
Wasn't it a thought for many years?
medical people, that reading was bad for women?
Yeah, well, certainly that reading fiction, maybe not reading, you know, improving devotional.
But, yeah, you come frequently, in the nineteenth century, you come across the idea that, you know, reading frivolous novels is bad for people, or saps their energy, or saps the strength that they should use for something else.
I find it fascinating that you have ... Here we are, Somerville.
You could, as a professional, as a physician, you could probably be anywhere you wanted to be.
Here you are in an industrial area that's hard to find.
It's right off an interstate.
You're upstairs.
There's an iron foundry downstairs.
There's an iron foundry, I learned, downstairs.
I guess, what is it that brings you here as an entry into the conversation?
Reach Out and Read grew up in... Do I need to go sort of check myself out in the bathroom mirror?
Am I groomed?
You look wonderful.
All right.
You tell me if I'm in trouble.
Reach Out and Read grew up in Boston Medical Center, actually in the hospital, in the Department of Pediatrics.
I'd be able to look at these before I go.
And we outgrew it at a certain point, as we went from being one program to being multiple programs as we...
hired staff and actually started becoming a small nonprofit organization.
And we needed more space.
And we went looking for space that would really work for us, where we could accommodate what seemed to us a very large staff.
And this building was available.
We could have much more space for the same money.
It's worked out well for us.
We may soon grow it.
But, you know, we are a nonprofit.
We raise money.
I mean, there's something wrong about a nonprofit that spends its money on very lavish offices.
This is comfortable and actually very convenient for all the people who commute, much more convenient than a wonderful address in downtown Boston would be, because they'd have to all drive into the city.
People just come through on the expressway.
I don't think I was talking so much geographically, I guess.
Philosophically, what brings you here as a professional?
Well, my involvement with Reach Out and Read really started as an accident, and maybe many such things do.
Maybe many obsessions or fanaticisms do.
This program was founded 15 years ago.
by two other pediatricians, Barry Zuckerman and Robert Needleman, and an early childhood educator at what was then Boston City Hospital and is now Boston Medical Center.
And when one of the pediatricians who'd founded it, Robert Needleman, got a job and moved to Cleveland about ten years ago, and I had interviewed him.
I had written an article for the New York Times Magazine about the Department of Pediatrics and about the
about the practical issues of trying to practice and teach pediatrics and do research in pediatrics in a setting that was essentially serving very poor children, and what kinds of programs and what kinds of research and what kinds of medicine and what kinds of medical issues.
And I had interviewed Robert about the Reach Out and Read program, and I had liked it, and when he told me he was moving to Cleveland,
He'd given me what I thought were very good quotes.
He told me he was moving to Cleveland.
I said, oh, what's going to happen to that nice little book program you run?
And he said, I'm looking for someone who can take it over, because I'm afraid otherwise it'll just wither away.
And I believe his actual words were, they won't pay you anything, but it'll only take an hour or so a week.
So I was doing pediatric infectious diseases, which is what my fellowship training is.
And I said, sure.
And soon after that, the other founding pediatrician, who's Barry Zuckerman, who's now the chairman of the department and the chairman of our board, had this vision that we should replicate the program, that we should write a grant, that we should write a manual, that we should help other programs do this, and that, in fact, this idea of promoting reading aloud and giving out books at pediatric visits was something with enormous potential that it could become
he likes to say, as standard as giving shots.
And I'm not even sure that he had a sense of how it would catch on and how it would grow.
But as it grew, it kind of took over bigger and bigger chunks of my life, squeezed out other things.
And I suspect that it has now
I've probably become a fanatic.
It's probably consuming your life to a degree, but pleasantly so.
As I say, it's a gentle madness in another context.
Exactly.
You have to watch out that you don't become someone who's always looking for opportunities to hold forth on your subject and how it can save the world.
If everybody else would just stop nattering on about all these other less relevant
You've got the subject.
See, you used the phrase, this little book program that he had.
And is that basically how it started?
I read this wonderful lecture that you gave.
It published a PDF file.
Colorado published it.
It was a big 12-page lecture where you really get into the details of this Reach Out report, the three parts and the three elements that you try to use, and how you actually measure
We can give you lots of research on the book.
And really how a child will actually hold a book and turn it around.
This dazzles me, and then making the transition from the picture to the word.
Oh, I'll have to show you some of our materials.
Yeah, well, what happened, the legend, I mean.
Just let me finish, because I can frame that and then pick up as part of the question, but was any of this
kind of in the part of the discourse when this program was starting, or really was it an attempt to put books in the hands of kids who might otherwise not have them?
Well, I think some combination.
That is to say, the legend of the founding of the program, and I wasn't there, and if the program was sufficiently successful that it already, even though it was only 15 years ago, has a little bit of legend to it, is that... And the legend is good, by the way.
Yeah.
Oh, absolutely.
that you had this big waiting room for this big, busy inner-city clinic, and it was pretty barren.
And the doctors and nurses used to bring in all kinds of used books from home, so there'd be something there.
And that as fast as they brought in the used books, the kids took them home.
And some people thought that this was... I can close the door.
I'm sorry.
Especially if you're taping it.
Okay.
It's probably better to close it, just so you won't end up with... They won't have to listen to me hold forth.
They know all this.
Some people thought this was a problem, that as quickly as you brought books in, they left.
But most people thought that it was actually kind of nice to see the children leaving the clinic, holding on to the books.
And they began to think about, should we do this systematically?
What about if we actually bought books, and we bought new books, and we bought beautiful books?
And then from that came the question, well, if you're going to actually spend money and get grants and beg for money to buy books,
What kind of books would be most useful?
What ages would you want to target?
Who should give the book?
What can you say when you give the book that will actually make it more likely that a parent will know what to do with the book?
And that was the beginning of the program.
But from the very beginning, there was a lot of thought about, you know, where should we concentrate our energies?
We begin at six months.
We end at five years.
Neither of those is an accident.
And in fact, both of those, there are people who disagree about, you know... Some think six months is too early, do you think?
No, some think it's too late.
There are a lot of programs out there that especially give a book at birth or a bag of books at birth.
It's a very appealing idea, and a lot of states do it, or charitable groups that give you a book when you're born or a first book in the hospital.
And we deliberately don't do that.
We deliberately wait till six months because, well...
Barry Zuckerman, my boss, feels strongly that up till six months, babies aren't really interested in objects.
They're interested in voices and people.
It's very important to talk to your baby and sing to your baby, but the book itself is not going to be that interesting.
They can't focus that far away in terms of their eyes, and they're really much more, much less likely to reach and grasp and enjoy an object.
And also, at six months, they can sit up by themselves.
They've got social smiles.
They're very interactive.
So if you will, let me grab a book.
I have all of our books.
If you have a mother who maybe has never thought about reading to a child as an important activity, and you give her, this is one of our six-month-old books, because babies like faces.
And so if you hold this book out to a six-month-old,
The baby will smile.
The baby will reach for the book.
The baby will vocalize.
The parent, even if the parent thinks this is like a strange or a silly idea to read to a child this young, the parent's going to see the reaction, and then, of course, the baby will grab the book and chew it.
That's why we start with board books.
So starting at six months is very deliberate, and then we do this at every checkup until five years, and then we stop at five years because...
At that point, we hope the child's in school and there's at least somebody else in the child's life to talk about books and reading.
And the idea was to target that window when maybe there, for many children, isn't anybody else pushing books and reading aloud.
And I mean, one of the interesting things about talking to
audiences, which include daycare providers and first-grade teachers and Head Start teachers and kindergarten teachers, is the unanimity with which those people say that on the first day of school you can look around the room and tell which children have never handled books.
Really?
And that there are always such children in the room, and they don't, at whatever age, three, four, five, they don't know how to hold a book, they don't know
what it's for, why it's appealing.
They don't know how to listen to a story.
They don't understand kind of the narrative arc of the story.
You probably have thought about all of this, but I had never thought about the question of how you know whether I'm talking to you or reading aloud to you.
What is it about my voice which signals to you that I'm talking, not reading?
Or when you're listening to a lecture, how do you know whether the lecturer is speaking from notes or
reading a prepared talk, the children who are read to understand that difference very young.
And you can tell they understand it because they babble.
There's something called book babble.
I saw that phrase, and I wrote it down.
That's a new phrase for me.
You know, babble, babble is this wordless
It sounds an oxymoron, isn't it?
No, book babble is really cool.
It sounds like reading aloud.
I can't really do it well, but it's a... Just as you can have a conversation in babble, a child whose, you know, children, babies go from just random syllables to babble that sounds like questions.
And then, but they also, they develop a babble which sounds like reading aloud.
And that's very early, and then by the time you get to school, right, you understand there's something about that cadence, that reading aloud cadence.
Somebody must have analyzed what is the difference.
I mean, I know I can hear the difference, but I don't know what I'm hearing.
Fascinating.
And it's a very productive step in the development of the child.
Yeah, absolutely.
Because the child is aspiring to read and is responding to... But it's also, the brain is somehow taking in, and there's a difference, you know...
In addition to the actual work of decoding spoken language, what does this word mean, you have to learn as a child to decode all kinds of things.
What's the emotional content?
Is this information?
Is this prohibition?
What am I hearing?
Why am I hearing this?
And by the time you get to school, you want to know, oh, that's somebody reading a story.
And you also want to think, oh, good, that's somebody reading a story.
Now I'm going to pull up close so I can see the pictures, and I'm going to listen, and I want to know what happens next, and this is going to be fun.
And children who are coming to school without being read to, this is all news.
And I think it's a much harder job for teachers.
Getting them from there to the work of learning to read is such a struggle.
One of the things that I've come to understand working with this program is what an impressive thing it is that we learn to read.
You know, what a hard job it is.
You mentioned in one of the essays that you wrote, one of the lectures that you gave, probably in a room, that you really hope to have ten books in the possession of the child between the ages of six.
That's how many visits there are.
That's kind of a magic number.
Do you want to grab that?
No, no, no.
So the selection becomes very significant, doesn't it?
I mean, you must labor.
We do.
I'll introduce you to the people who put our catalog together.
We put a catalog together with Scholastic Books that includes books from a large number of publishers.
And it's a combination of the books that we think will work and we think are good and we can get good discounts on because money's always tight.
And each program orders its own books because we have
Our populations are very varied.
I mean, this book that I was showing you, you'll notice it's bilingual.
Russian English.
It also comes in Vietnamese.
We have 13 languages for this book, and here's the Spanish version.
So every clinic orders its own, but we've got lots of books that we think are, you know, especially for the younger children that are really appealing, that they'll really reach for.
Um, these pictures with, these books with the pictures of babies, but also, um... Oh, that's quite nice.
Oh, good.
So you can keep talking.
These are for younger babies.
I multitask these things.
Okay.
Well, these are for younger babies.
These are for six-month-olds and nine-month-olds, you know, because they're built for people with small hands, and they have faces, and they're very chewable.
But they're also, I always point this out to doctors, they are engineered for people without pincer grasps, because babies don't have pincer grasps until they're about nine months old.
When they grab, they use the whole hand.
So if you open this book, the pages all separate, so you can get from page to page by doing this.
You don't need to do this, which you can't do at all in a paper page book.
There was a wonderful quote of yours, which is...
repeated any number of different places.
And, in fact, I used it in my proposal to Harper's on this book.
Were you—and I can only paraphrase it, but were you—you say reading is as essential as food.
You can't think of a child without—you think of a child without reading as you would think of a child without food and nourishment and medical care.
Well, that's true.
It's a waste.
I mean, I don't know if you've looked at two-year-olds recently.
And it's hard to look at two-year-olds because they are essentially completely uncooperative.
Whatever it is you want them to do, they won't do, and they'll do the other thing.
But two-year-olds, a reasonably bright, not brilliant, just a reasonably bright, normal two-year-old who has been read to, their level of engagement with books is very profound and very complicated and very intense.
They use books as transitional objects.
many of them, you know, they have one book that they carry everywhere, they take to bed with them, they want to hear the same books over and over and over, and they know exactly what belongs on every page, and they memorize them, and if you change a single word, the two-year-old corrects you.
They have these incredibly intense, powerful relationships with, it can be hundreds of books, and when you think about that not being there, when you think about, and we're talking about children who just started talking, we're not talking about very sophisticated or very grown-up children, when you think about
a two-year-old missing that, you know, not having any chance to sort of make those connections, to relate to books in that way, in that very powerful early way, something's just missing.
It's just, you know, some tremendous opportunity has been lost, something which could make that child's brain grow.
Years ago, we developed a poster that was going to hang in doctors' offices, and I can show it to you.
It was a
a doctor bunny listening to a patient, and I was supposed to write a jingle to go on it.
And I wrote the jingle which said, this is something like, this is a message from your doctor's heart.
Books help babies grow up smart.
And I was told I couldn't use the word smart because it was judgmental.
And I couldn't believe that I was, this was, you know, the publishing company, the underwriter said, you know, smart is a judgmental world.
I work with a
you know, inner city, fairly impoverished population.
All these parents want their kids to be smart.
It's not judgmental.
People are delighted if you tell them.
And most babies, most pediatricians secretly believe that most babies and most toddlers are very, very smart.
They're very alert.
They're very interested.
They'll sort of suck up whatever you give them, good or bad.
They want to know everything.
You don't have to encourage them to learn.
That's the developmental trajectory.
And when you look at a two-year-old who is just missing all of this, has had no chance to
memorize the books or learn the books or, you know, look at them, something's lost.
And you don't get that window back in the same way you don't get it back for spoken language.
You get other chances.
It's not, you know, it's not that... You miss the train, you can't get it.
Yeah.
Yeah, but there's some moment... But you do get there earlier if you get the earlier train.
But also some moment when this is just joy.
You're not, it's not pedagogical, it's not forced, it's just
You know, you've got this sponge-like brain and this child who's ready to memorize and ready to absorb all this, and it's just, you're not giving it.
You're just skipping it.
It seems very sad.
And the two-year-olds are especially fun because they can do so much and they can memorize.
You know, if you talk to a parent who's got a dinosaur-obsessed two-year-old or I had a truck-obsessed two-year-old and I have no interest in trucks,
But there was a period there where we probably, he and I, could identify hundreds of trucks.
You know, these are the world's most boring children's books are about trucks.
And they come, there are thousands of them.
My wife and I review children's books for a couple of newspapers.
Oh, really?
It's kind of a thing we do together, and I do eight of them a month, but it's amazing the truck books that come in.
And they just, I send them out to the library.
There's a series called Vernie Drives a Truck, which was,
You know, you would read these aloud, and they would be like, trucks do many very important jobs.
Trucks deliver groceries to the grocery store.
Fire trucks.
Dump trucks.
Absolutely.
Cement trucks.
I don't know what it is.
I don't know what it is, but, and it's not that, you know, your life would be poorer if you couldn't name a hundred different trucks, but that intense level of engagement, that sort of
Being a two-year-old and already being a specialist, learning a specialist vocabulary.
There's a recent book that came in, and I can't think of the title, but it's a study of the brain, and it's a study of language.
And the woman who wrote the book puts forth the, it's not a theory, but she says that the propensity for language is instinctive.
I guess they had a chance to look at some feral children or whatever.
And even though there was nobody to teach them language, I guess the ability is there.
Obviously, the learning element comes in.
Do you think that taking it to the next level, that reading is kind of an innate?
Interesting question.
I wonder.
What do you think?
Well, I mean, I'm thinking of, when you talk about these kids just reaching out for these books and responding to them without any, it's extraordinary.
I mean, written language does develop independently in numerous cultures.
It is amazing.
It does.
Yeah, it does.
Which I can write about in this book here, to a small degree.
But, which is why it is, what you're learning with this program totally fascinates me, I have to say.
Is there a tactility to it as well?
I mean, it sounds like it.
Does it have to be an object?
And I don't want to get into the debate about the electronic book, but it is relevant to the conversation.
I think it has to be an object.
I think, you know, there are an awful lot of ways, and I'm sure that I don't have to convince you, but there are an awful lot of ways in which there's nothing as satisfying as a book.
And starting with the six-month-old who can chew it,
and handle it and kind of master it and manipulate it.
And then what we do is we move, even if you hear, say, books for an older, these are books for like a one-year-old.
They're a little bigger and a little heavier.
They're still indestructible, but they're a little more conceptual.
You know, you have baby animals and a little more of a story.
But these books don't all pop up.
You need a pincer grasp.
You need to turn the pages.
That's important with kids, handling the book, controlling the book, manipulating the book.
And then one of the really exciting things that happens when you turn two.
Well, possessing a book, too, is a factor.
Absolutely.
But you've described quite, these kids take them.
I'm sorry to interrupt.
No, no, no.
Go on.
Having it in your home, owning it.
And I love libraries.
And one of the things we try to do is if the parents, once the parents are hooked, once they're saying, yeah, he really does like books, is direct them toward the library.
But there's also something about owning.
a certain number of them that are yours.
Yeah, I know.
But I think you've got to remember, a lot of these kids are growing up in homes with no books, no print.
You don't get your information from print.
You don't get your celebrity gossip from print.
You don't get anything from print.
I think it changes the character of the home, even a few books.
What I was going to say about two-year-olds is that two-year-olds can turn paper pages.
They have pincer graphs.
So that's where we make that key transition.
Somewhere right around there.
It depends on how much you've been read to.
A child who's growing up in a home full of books and has learned to be careful of books and how to handle them by two.
A child who's not been exposed to paper pages as much, maybe it's going to be two and a half.
But by two, they've definitely got the control, and they can turn the pages without ripping them.
Although, one thing which really happened to me is that...
I had this bruiser of a two-year-old in my office.
I said, really?
Sort of the Incredible Hulk.
And I gave him a board book like this.
It was clear to me that he was not ready for paper pages.
And I said to the mom, I'm going to give him this board book.
It's nice and sturdy.
It'll last a long time.
And she said, oh, no, it won't.
And he shredded it in front of me, like Superman with the phone book.
It's really funny.
All right, for your child, we need books made out of metal.
know board books won't do it but i think the tactile thing is really important i think that it's also what me for babies part of the appeal of the book is that if you wave the book at mom and mom's going to reach you that means you get to be on mom's lap and you get mom's voice and you get mom's one-on-one attention which is interesting very much what babies want i mean to you
Once you get to three-year-olds or four-year-olds or five-year-olds, you have that electronic competition.
You might have, you know, I want my video or I want my video game.
But a six-month-old or a one-year-old or even a two-year-old would probably rather have the parent one-on-one than anything.
You know, some of these are, you know, kids will scream or tear the house down just to get a parent paying attention, even if the parent's angry.
So one of the things that you get is not just the tactile quality of the book, but you get to be
on a parent's lap in physical contact with the parent, the parent looking at you, looking with you at the book, holding you.
And I suspect that that's where some of those positive associations, even for people who can't quite identify it, that's where it comes from.
Your first repeated exposure to the sound of someone reading aloud or to words on the page or to the object of a book is in this
most safe, most protected, most familiar, you know, with the most important person in the world when you're a one-year-old, most important voice in the world, and the book is one of the ways you get that person to yourself.
At what point does the content of the book become important, or does it in this
in this window that you're talking about?
I think that, you know, I think it's important from the beginning in the sense that I think, you know, you want faces for the youngest babies and then you want interesting things like animals and pictures of families.
By the time the kids get to three, you're asking them if you can.
You're bringing in two or three books and you're saying, you know, which one would you like?
And one of the interesting things, talking of book ownership, that I've found again and again is if I bring in, you know, if I have a three-year-old or a four-year-old
And I bring in... That's kind of like your doctor bag, right?
Oh, my sample bag of books.
Well, also because when I talk about... Oh, that's a great picture.
I don't mean to interrupt your... Okay, that's all right.
Oh, yeah, you're right.
But so if I bring in three books and I say, you know, I want to choose one of these, and say the three-year-old looks at it and says...
We have that one at my school.
We have that one at my daycare.
We have that one at my Head Start.
That's the one that he wants, always.
It's never, oh, we have this one at my school, so I'll take that one.
It's always, if there's a book that they have at school and it gets read at school, they want to own it.
They know that book.
It's familiar.
And it's sort of really interesting because I'm usually there saying, oh, well, if you already know this one, take that one.
No, no, no, I want that one.
But you know what?
I'm the same way.
I go into the library.
If I go to Widener or wherever, which is why the library, you go to find a particular book, but it's always the one half a dozen volumes down that you never heard of before that's vastly more interesting.
You take it out and you take it home or whatever.
I have to own that book.
I mean, I have...
Do you have to possess multiple copies of some books?
Some books I do, yeah.
What was it that said Hebrew, I guess, in my first book?
You have to have three.
A gentleman must have three copies of every book.
One is the collectible, one to read, and one to loan.
To lend.
Yeah, I have reading copies of some books.
Books that are pretty, well, of course, variant editions with different, that's a whole different one.
How about the, now this is not really serious, but how are there certain books that you feel you have to rescue if you see copies of them sort of randomly on a shelf?
I have a chapter in there where I, shelf life, my shelf life chapter, where I talk about my favorite collection within a collection at home.
It's called my orphan collection.
the books that my wife Connie and I actually go out and rescue their discards from libraries.
And the title of this book comes from an Emerson essay in the Dial magazine, which Emerson and I have the same birthday, which is May 25th.
That's not overly relevant, but the fact is this, and the epigraph of this book is where the title for this, and we found that in an essay that had been
And a bundle of dial magazines had been discarded at a bookseal.
Well, these things are worth, never mind the monetary value, just the fact that this library had chosen to sell for five dollars this bundle.
I mean, Emerson was the founder, Margaret Fuller was the founding editor, or was the contributor.
And here's this extraordinary essay where Emerson refers to books as the splendors of letters.
Sorry, I'm babbling here, but books that are discarded and about to, for me, it's like going to the pound, you know, and giving some animal a very uncertain future.
It doesn't matter if it's, I like books that are read.
I love books that have prior ownership and a history.
It doesn't bother me at all.
In fact, I kind of like annotations, and I don't know if you feel the same.
I like to, if it's intelligent,
Well, it depends on what they are.
If it's a great rarity, you don't want to touch it.
But on the other hand, a book that's pristine, as far as I'm concerned, has never been handled.
So what's the point there?
I don't know.
We have lots of fun.
I'm sorry we're jumping around the block.
That's all right.
And tell me, by the way, what your schedule is.
If you're fine, I'm fine.
I'm fine.
And at some point, I'd love to walk you around and show you and introduce you to people.
I would like that.
And if it's okay, maybe we can have a follow-up at some point.
And do you think Dr. Zuckerman would be... I could be delighted.
I'd love to talk.
I really plan a major treatment on this thing.
Oh, good.
Robert Coles I want to talk to, who I talked to before.
And I also want to get into another concept, absolutely related, but I noticed that you're involved with that as well.
Teaching medical students at a course where you teach them fiction, you know, how to read the classics and how you really believe, you know, we're talking about arguably the most intelligent, sensitive people in our culture.
Everywhere I go, if I give talks or lectures or signings,
I can always count on having a physician or two come up, and there'll be bibliophiles.
And the specialty won't be medicine.
It'll be something else.
It'll be music.
It'll be poetry.
It'll be 18th century French.
It doesn't matter.
There must be something in the brain there, I'm sure.
That'd be nice.
How many physicians, such as yourself, are wonderful writers?
Yeah.
I mean, that's not a coincidence.
No, it's not.
After a while, the pattern is... And I see that you have theories on that as well, in fact.
You need descriptions.
There's a lot of metaphor involved in medicine, I guess.
Yes, there is.
I do think that's true.
I also think that...
Well, one of the talks that I give, I sometimes talk about the relationship between learning medicine and learning journalism in the sense of learning to ask rude questions or getting permission to ask rude questions.
A large part of medical training, what they call taking a history, is walking into a room, meeting someone old enough to be your grandmother,
and, you know, sitting down and within five minutes you're asking her questions, which no one would ask in polite company.
And the fact that medicine attracts people who are interested in having the license to do that and then actually teaches them how to do it and rewards them for it, I think is in some way related to the impulse that drives many journalists.
I mean, I know it would be, you know, I know it would be more polite not to ask you how you feel as you wait to be executed, but, hey, I'm allowed to ask that.
I'm a journalist.
It's my job.
So I think there are overlaps, and certainly medicine is, there's a lot of plot.
There's a lot of plot and a lot of detail.
Kohl's, when I talked to him a few number of years ago, why would you teach a Tolstoy story to medical students?
There was one story in particular, the death of Ivan Elyich.
Not the death of Ivan Elyich, it's where a family is, they're angry at a grandparent who's
eating sloppily, and so they say, we're going to feed you in a bowl, you know, like a toiletry type thing, and so that's fine, and then one day they come home and the child is making something, and I say, what are you making?
Well, I'm making a bowl for you when you get older, so I can, you know, I'm not doing justice to this story and the way he told it, but, you know, and then he asks his medical students, what does that tell you about
Whatever, you know, and how fiction can be so instructive, how stories can be instructive to medical students.
There's a whole genre now of, I've seen any number of stories, of programs, everywhere.
They just seem to be catching on.
And mental humanity to people.
The power to listen, I guess.
Yeah.
And empathy, I guess.
And empathy.
You know, medicine becomes more and more technological, and people are wrestling with the question of how to produce doctors with more skills in empathy and human relationships, because it's not been the pride of the profession all along.
When you have a child, a patient come in.
Do you talk about the reading over the past six months or whatever?
Well, you talk about development.
So what I try to do, and I usually do this when I get it right, when I do a physical, is I try to come into the room with a book, give the child a book, and then as I'm saying, you know, hi, how's he doing?
Oh my gosh, she's gotten so big.
Watch and see what the child's doing with the book and see what the parent says.
And so, for example, I had these
great 18-month-old twins the other day, and it was incredibly chaotic, because they were 18-month-old twins, and I had two different board books, and I came in with them, and I said to the model, okay, you know, who gets which?
And she looked at them, and she said, oh, you know, he gets that one, because he loves animals, and his favorite book is some other, and he gets the other one.
And I said, so, you know, they like books.
Oh, and she was, you know, she started talking and boasting about, you know, how much they love the books, and this one knows this book about animal sounds by heart.
And the truth is that, first of all, that's very reassuring from the point of view of what kind of childhood they're having.
But second of all, if her 18-month-old knows the Animal Sound book by heart, then I don't need to say to her, okay, by 18 months, he should have some words besides mama and dada.
Now, does he?
Now, when he says those words, are you the only one who can understand them?
And those are kind of standard pediatric developmental questions, because...
between one year and two years, part of our standard brief is we're supposed to pick up speech delay, we're supposed to pick up developmental delay, a child who's not learning to talk on time, we're supposed to refer.
There's a whole lot of imperatives that are part of our practice.
When I do this right, by having the book in there, by having the parent talk about the child's skills with books, by watching the child with the book, I get those questions answered.
And so I had another child
Animal sounds are very popular, too.
I had a two-year-old yesterday who I gave him a book, and the father starts pointing at the pictures and saying, what does a dog say?
And the kid goes, woof, woof.
It was a pretty good woof.
I mean, I could understand the woof, and what does the sheep say?
Bah, bah.
And again, so that tells you a lot as a doctor about, first of all, the parent's interaction with the child and whether the parent kind of knows what he's doing with a two-year-old and has reasonable expectations, and it
Also tells you something about the child's hearing and the child's cognitive development.
And yeah, he's got words.
You know what you're telling me is that the book is as helpful to you, the physician, as it is.
When it works right.
When we do it right, I think it is.
That's part of our case at Reach Out to Me.
That's pretty interesting.
Well, because we're adding something to a visit.
There are so many imperatives that you're supposed to fulfill in these visits.
Talk about discipline, talk about nutrition, growth, weight and height, all of this stuff.
that one of the reasons this works is that people who get used to doing this with the book find out that they can use the book for a whole bunch of things.
In the same way that if you've got, you know, there are all of these rules that you learn.
For example, when you're two, you're supposed to have a vocabulary of a couple of hundred words.
And when you speak, about 50% of your language is supposed to be intelligible to someone other than your parent.
So if you bring your two-year-old to me and some of his words are garbled, that's not a red flag.
I don't have to send you for evaluation.
If you bring your two-year-old and all of his words are garbled and I can't understand a single one, I need to test your child's hearing and I need to have you have a speech evaluation.
And if I don't do that as the pediatrician and it turns out that your child can't hear well and we go another year and we lose that window in which speech is formed,
I'm not doing my job right.
How essential is, and you must have cases where the parents are illiterate and can't read to the child.
That's a really good question.
Does that happen?
Yeah, it's a really good question, and we've tried a lot here at Reach Out and Read to link up with adult literacy and family literacy organizations.
Well, I have a lot of answers to this question, none of which are very satisfactory, and I'm sure you know all of the horror statistics on how many adults in this country.
Most adults in this country are not actually unable to sign their names.
Most of them can sign their names, or they can figure out a word on a page, but many of them can't go much further than that.
They don't read fluently, and they don't read for pleasure, and there's no real proficiency.
I mean, 37 percent of the adult population in Washington, D.C., according to Ralph Nader's group, which is helping with this Save D.C.
Libraries thing, is functionally illiterate.
Right.
37 percent.
Yeah.
That's, you know, a lot.
That's a lot.
But they can sign their names, is what I think.
I mean, I have patients coming from the Sudan at the International Clinic who actually sign their names with their thoughts.
That's not what illiteracy looks like in this country, by and large.
We have people who can fake it, too, and pass.
We have people who can do it all the time.
But as far as with the very little babies, I think, you know, you can just still tell the parent, hold them on your lap, look at the pictures, you know, what does the dog say, what's the baby do.
We don't, in medicine, it's been studied numerous times, we generally don't know which of our patients can read and which of our patients can't read easily.
And we don't generally ask it.
And when I talk to doctors about this, most people feel uncomfortable asking that question.
But I suspect you can perceive it.
Well, you sometimes can, but I think you often... I don't know the point of that question, but I'm just... Yeah, you sometimes have an idea, but it's one of the things that we actually really need to get better at is figuring out how to ask that question.
I mean, there's a lot of received wisdom in medicine about how to ask awkward questions.
For example, you don't ask, so how much do you drink?
I mean, that doesn't work.
My doctor asked me that question.
Well.
She says that I answer honestly, but a little bit of wine here and there.
If you are talking to someone you don't know well, and you are concerned that that person may have a drinking problem, so how much do you drink is not a recommended question to get an honest answer.
People rarely answer by saying, you know, I'm drunk every night.
Right.
So instead, there is, for example, there's something called, there are four questions.
that you're supposed to ask, and if you get a yes to any one of them, it's a red flag.
There's probably a drinking problem.
Ask some more questions.
But the questions are, they start with, so have you ever tried to cut down on your drinking?
Do people ever annoy you about your drinking?
Do you ever need an eye-opener in the morning?
It's a real drinking problem.
Right.
So, but those are, they're less direct ways.
So, doctors that I talk to are usually pretty uncomfortable about asking, so, you know, can you read, or do you have any problem with reading?
Whether or not people would present that.
I think that would be almost harder to ask on the drinking question.
That's what doctors say?
Don't you think so?
Well, it's interesting because so much of our training... Because that's driving to what people perceive as intelligence.
Yeah, but I routinely ask.
mothers with new babies, whether they used drugs during the pregnancy or drank during the pregnancy or smoked during the pregnancy.
And I don't feel embarrassed asking it, and I also... Yeah, because you're concerned about the child at this point.
Right.
But I also routinely ask, you know, adolescents people who I hardly know how many sexual partners they have or what they do with them.
All I mean is we feel a certain professional entitlement to ask
fairly personal questions.
This one worries us, and I think we need to figure out how to ask it.
But that's right in there in that league, isn't it?
About sexual activity, about drinking.
I hadn't thought of it.
It's actually more complicated because many people who don't read proficiently think they do.
Some of them are covering it up and hiding it and lying, but I think that many people who can't... Okay, we're going again.
That's the same tape, right?
That's the same tape, right where I left off.
Oh.
Oh, I see, the machine clicked, not the tape.
The machine must have, the battery, which was fresh, must have just run out of gas.
Oh.
So instead of changing the battery, I just changed the machine.
I see.
I was going to say something else.
Sorry, go ahead.
I don't remember what I was saying.
If it seems that I haven't asked you a lot of
biographical questions.
I have all that, and I'm looking for some nice fresh quotes that I think we're getting.
You had mentioned the board books and how the ten books over the five years, so you do have a progressive transition that is measured?
Yes, starting with the board books, moving on to the simpler books with paper pages, and then especially as the children get
get older and can choose more complicated story books, books with more words on the page.
This is a very cool one.
This one, actually, I work in Dorchester, and about a third of our population at my health center is Vietnamese.
And this is a book which, when we first got it,
It has too many words on the page.
We don't usually give books with quite as much text, especially since it's about the Vietnamese family.
I was afraid we'd be giving it to people who didn't read English easily.
But it's about Vietnamese girls on their first days at an American school.
And the pictures were so evocative for our population of the Vietnamese girls at the school that we still use it.
We still get it.
It's a nice book.
But, yeah.
You know, once you can handle paper pages and, you know, parents are a little more adventurous, there's a lot of books out there.
And then there's that transition to the library, and then there's school, which if the schools survive and their libraries survive, there's more and more books.
Do you have a process for measuring the results?
We do.
What we have, we have a collection of studies, all of which were peer-reviewed and published in the
medical literature in which a number of different researchers around the country had studied a couple of different outcomes.
They started out studying parent attitudes, which they did by asking parents, what are your favorite things to do with your child or what are your child's favorite activities?
And then they would score them according to whether or not they spontaneously mentioned reading books because
You can't really ask parents, do you read to your child?
There's too much social desirability.
People know they're supposed to say yes, so you have to ask them, what's everything that you do routinely at bedtime?
And then you listen to see whether they say they read.
And there are a number of studies, and I can give you copies of some of them, to show that the children who participate in this program and parents are much more likely to mention.
Oh, yeah.
Documentary backup.
Load you up with data.
It can never be too much from my standpoint.
And there are also three published studies now looking at both expressive and receptive language in a group of children getting the Reach Out and Read program and persisting group of kids.
And is it searchable?
Like you have these online?
I can give them to you.
We have the research summary.
I'd love to have this stuff.
Yeah.
So, yeah, we actually, as interventions go, we have good data.
I would say about our data that
inadvertently, some of what we're studying is what I would call the barrenness of the background.
That is to say, ten books in the home shouldn't make such a big difference.
If my kids had ten more books in the home, you wouldn't notice it.
So I think when we're seeing the effects that we're seeing, one of the things that we're studying almost inadvertently
is how many children are growing up in print-poor or actually print-free environments, and not just very poor children either.
I think that there are... Some of what we're doing is we're getting the book in early, and we're talking about reading aloud to the six-month-old, and maybe the parents would have thought of it when the child was three, but wouldn't have thought of it this early, and we're doing them a favor by starting them early.
But some of what we're seeing, I think, is that a lot of children who may not even be economically very impoverished
are growing up in very impoverished environments in terms of the stimulation that's there is electronic.
And I'm sorry, but it doesn't work.
It doesn't, you don't learn language from the TV.
So you do think that, and I don't, again, want to make a big deal out of this.
I have three chapters in the future enough on that already, but the book does make, is... If you could learn language from the television set,
From my point of view as a pediatrician serving the population I serve, it would be only good news because my patients are exposed to so much television.
If television made you smart and taught you language, I mean, I love television myself, but if television made children smart and taught them language, it would be great news.
It would be wonderful news for the kids that I take care of and their opportunities when they get to school.
Unfortunately, it doesn't seem to.
We had a lecturer at our conference this year, a woman, a scientist from the University of Washington, Washington State, named Patricia Kuhl, KUHL, and she talked about language acquisition.
She showed us some of the videotapes they make of babies and the whole question of the way that newborns can recognize all the different sounds in the world and that then you
You concentrate down on the sounds that are actually used in your language.
And she showed us the way that the exposure to a little bit of spoken Chinese changed baby sound recognition patterns.
But then they tried to do the whole same thing with videotapes and having the babies here exposed to the same sounds on videotapes.
And it didn't work.
You don't learn to talk.
You know, what do you make of this Harry Potter phenomenon?
I mean, really, it's books.
The Boston Globe said when one of the books came out, the day the video screens went dark.
You know, the day the kids.
The way they hunger for this object.
Oh, yeah.
And what you see is they're grabbing... My daughter, Nicole, when she had this little program with the girls' club, my wife and I gave a bunch of children's books and we reviewed books.
Yeah, yeah.
It was like
Better than candy.
Better than treats.
I don't think that's changed.
I mean, children, even children who play video games and are confident with computers and watch TV, there is still something for many of them about the book.
And there's a sort of, I think that addiction, that addicted quality persists.
I mean, I have three kids, and I recognize it in all of them.
I don't think that's changed.
And Harry Potter's, I love the Harry Potter stuff.
I haven't read any of them, but there are no illustrations.
They're quite complicated.
There's no interactivity.
It's bigger than any one of my books, and my books are 600 pages.
Yeah.
There's not this one, but... And they're, you know what they are?
They're old-fashioned school stories, like the stories that many of us grew up reading.
You know, they're boarding, there seems to be, even for children in this country, something so irresistible about the idea of, you know, being sent off to a boarding school.
Yeah.
And, you know, having to get along with the other kids and get along with the teachers.
So it's a little early yet, 15 years, to really have any kind of,
studies that might say how these kids would have measured otherwise if they hadn't... That's hard to do.
I'll show you what we've got.
I don't want to claim more for our data than they do.
The problem with long-term follow-up studies in the populations we serve is just that there's so many other factors come into play.
How are you going to look at the impact of getting ten books from the doctor between six months and five years if there's also been, oh, I don't know, three changes of custody or...
five different schools or, you know, many... That's going to be a hard study to do.
And, you know, in a way, my hope is, my aspiration for children is that, again, it's not a case of, you know, miss the train and it's gone forever.
I don't like to think... I think the children who grow up without books and without being read aloud to are behind in a disadvantage when they come to school and that they're less likely...
to learn to read on schedule and their language support.
I don't, with my whole heart, I don't want to say, and that's it.
You know, I want to believe that there's enough plasticity and enough potential that if you find the right ways to teach and you find the right environment in the school, that it's more work and more effort for everyone.
But I want to believe that those children can also be readers and can, you know, can learn and be smart.
And we haven't even talked at all about your own writing and how...
your work as a physician and a pediatrician and as a pioneer in this Reach Out Read program, does this work its way into your own... Well, certainly the work as a physician does.
I mean, a lot of what I've written... Particularly your fiction, I would say.
Yeah, a lot of the fiction that I write is connected in some way to my work as a physician, partly just because there's sort of so much plot and so much incident.
It's so tempting.
And also because...
For reasons of patient confidentiality, there are lots of great things I see that I would never use in journalism where you have to keep the details the same.
So you save it and you make it into fiction.
I don't know exactly how... I mean, I can see the ways that Reach Out and Read and working with Reach Out and Read influenced me as I was watching my youngest child grow up.
It certainly changed my perspective.
I don't know how it shaped me as a writer, except that I have written about Reach Out and Read.
I mean, I think you would find if you went wandering around this office that most of the people here believe that they were profoundly shaped in various ways by books.
And working on this program has made me see more clearly the gaps and what happens to people who are sort of just left out of the print universe.
It's just not real to them.
That would be wonderful.
Thank you.
How are we doing here?
Very good.
Now, what this will do when it gets to the end of the tape, it will automatically reverse and record in the other direction.
They're really wonderful little things.
And I haven't lost an interview yet, so there's no... Did you want to show me around a little bit?
Yes, let's do it.
And then if it's okay, what I'd like to do is go home and transcribe the tape and get going on what I want to do.
And then if it's okay, maybe we could do some follow-up.
They're a lot larger than they appear to be.
Can I introduce you to someone?
Hi, Matt Dino.
Nice to meet you.
He is a writer who writes about books and reading and readers and libraries, and he's writing a book about... My reading book.
And he's interested in that.
Oh, really?
Oh, very.
Matt is interested.
Very interested.
Matt is, well, now he is our... I'm taping this, okay?
Just so you know it.
Sure.
He's now our Director of Government Relations and External Affairs.
He works with the federal government and with
a lot of our important relationships with major organizations and other initiatives statewide, federal.
But actually, tell them where you come from before you would reach out and reach out, what you used to do.
I was with the Books for Kids Foundation, a small literacy organization in New York that got donations of children's books from publishers and forwarded them on to programs like Reach Out and Read that sort of
kids in need of books.
So that's actually how I found out about Reach Out and Read and was looking to relocate up here back to Boston.
Do you have a card?
Yeah, many of them.
I might want to follow up a little bit with you.
Oh, good.
Super.
Yeah, excellent.
But you notice the list of the House of Representatives on the wall.
Yeah, of Congress, color-coded.
Yellow are supporters.
Green.
What is green?
The yellow are supporters by signing on to a letter in support of our request.
Green are members of the Appropriations Committee that help in other ways to help us get our funding.
I don't see a color for those who are opposed.
No, we don't have a color.
I can't imagine that anyone would come out in opposition to this.
Well, thanks in large part to Matt and the people who work with.
We're sort of proud to have very bipartisan support, both in the Senate and in the House.
The photos are bipartisan photos.
Here we go.
Well, there's Hillary Clinton over there.
I'm sure Barbara, well, not Barbara, Laura Bush must be around.
Yeah, there she is right there.
This is a Republican senator from Kansas.
This is a Republican senator from Texas.
That's Kay Hutchison Bailey.
And there's Ted Kennedy.
But...
Well, that's important, isn't it?
It's bipartisan.
It's bipartisan, and it's also... We're probably, well, we're the only national organization talking about very young children in all of the book and literacy and education.
We're the only ones who really are aiming at children, not children in preschools, not children in schools, six months to five years, children before they get to school.
And...
It had a lot to do with sort of keeping us addressing that and making sure that people hear us addressing that at federal level and also at state level.
Making sure they invest in us as well.
Great.
Fabulous.
Well, you have, what, 2,000 or so affiliates now?
We have more than 2,000 sites around the country now.
That's amazing.
And so how many children do you think roughly participate?
Two million.
Two million a year.
Wow.
Totally.